Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lops, and today I'm
joined by Dr. Vivek vanatharaman. He is assistant professor
in the Department of Anthropology and Archaeology at the
University of Calgary. And today we're talking mostly about
human tree climbing, running, and hunting. So, Doctor Van
Caerman, welcome to the show. It's a big pleasure
to everyone. Thanks for having me. So, let's start
with, uh, tree climbing because it's curious because on
the show, I've already had many anthropologists on and
with a few of them, I talked about walking
and running, but this is the first time I'm
going to talk about tree climbing specifically. So, I
mean, do you think that that's because it's a
topic that is not as explored in anthropology as
something like walking and running, and if so, why?
Yeah, um, thanks for thanks for the question. Um,
YEAH, it's interesting, we do kind of focus on
walking and running, and I think the big reason
for that, um, is that in industrialized societies that
anyone listening to this show will live in, um,
That's, uh, that's mostly what we do, right? We
run for exercise, we sort of walk everywhere, and
that's kind of what we, um, think of as,
as what humans do. Um, I got really interested
in human tree climbing, but because I was studying,
um, rainforest hunter gatherer populations, and these are populations
who actually, uh, climb trees on a nearly daily
basis, and. The reason that they do it is
because they, they need to. It's because that's where
food is located um in these environments. And we
can get more into that, but I think to,
to answer your question, I think that it's um
perhaps a case of what is in front of
us by seeing what we're, what we're looking at.
But as anthropologists, we want to understand the broad
sweep of human diversity to see what people do.
Across cultures, and as we dug into this, uh,
literature on human tree climbing, we found that actually
a lot of societies around the globe, whether they're
in rainforests or other kinds of habitats that they,
they climb trees pretty often. And um just to
just to back up a little bit, the reason
that we were interested in this kind of question
is that when we think about human locomotor evolution,
Uh, there's kind of a narrative that what happened
is that a few million years ago, we went
from living primarily in the trees, living in ape-like
existence, to being committed terrestrial bipeds, right? And a
really big question in the field is, you know,
when exactly did this happen? How fast did it
happen? What was the nature of that um transition?
And so, um, In paleoanthropology, when we find a,
uh, let's say a skeleton that exhibits some some
human-like uh traits, the, the automatic uh Uh, response
is to, is to say, well, you know, we
don't, uh, climb very much as as modern humans
and so It's unlikely that he, that these hominins
were climbing either, and this has been most notable
with a fossil called uh Australopithecus afarensis Lucy, uh,
which you're probably familiar with, lived about 3.5 million
years ago. From the waist up, it looked a
lot like a chimpanzee, but from the waist down,
it, it looked quite humanlike despite being quite a
bit smaller. Um, SO it, it likely had some
kind of striding gait. Um, AND it had, uh,
most importantly, it's, it's big toe instead of having
its, um, big toe out to the side, it
was, it was up in the, up in the
front. Um, SO this is indicative of a, of
a shift toward, uh, more of a life on
the ground, but the question is, does that preclude
significant amounts of arboreality, and so we conducted some
studies and we think that the answer is, is
not necessarily.
Right. But I, I mean, how regularly do humans
in traditional societies climb trees? Of course, I would
imagine it depends the location where they live, if
there's many trees there or not, but uh how
often do they do it?
Yeah, the answer is it depends, and the, the
data are a little bit hard to, to come
by, but from what we were able to find
it, uh, it can be up to 10% of
the day, uh, spent in a tree, and I
think that's kind of an upper limit. These are
rainforest hunter gatherer populations. I believe that's a population
from like, um, Democratic Republic of Congo, um, so
yeah, dense humid rainforest. So people will spend, um,
Yeah, a lot of time and, you know, the
main reason that they'll be there is, is, um,
foraging. But what's interesting in these groups is that
it's not um like what you see in um
like a your your typical primate population, um like
apes or monkeys were kind of everyone is doing
similar things. What you see in human populations is
that sometimes it's um particular people that specialize in
Uh, in this climbing and might do it more
than others. So, it's kind of reflective of a
division of labor that you see in humans. Um,
SO, yeah, it's not everybody doing this all the
time, but, um, it is to get significant uh
amounts of food, and so, um it can actually
happen more than, than we think. The population I
work with called the Batek, um, at least as
far back as the 70s, they were climbing 50
m trees on a daily basis. Um, SO it
can be frequent, but it isn't always.
So, you mentioned food, is that the primary thing
they go up on the trees to do to
uh gather food? I mean, it's for foraging purposes
or are there other kinds of things that they
do up there?
Yeah, it seems like it's mostly food, although, uh,
predation is also another um reason that they would
do this. There's actually some really interesting documentation of
of tree houses, some of them like extremely large
and elaborate, that have been built in some societies,
uh, that people like to keep their You know,
abode off of the ground basically, where you're more
susceptible to to predation and other other kinds of
threats. Um, BUT aside from that, yeah, it's food
and it's mainly um hunting, so you can hunt
from trees or you can go up in a
tree to get an animal, um, or you can,
yeah, hunt from the tree where you might ambush
an animal down below like a deer hunter might
like in North America, for example, um. And then
also fruit, so, you know, especially in tropical rainforest
populations, you have really big trees and a lot
of the food is locked up uh in the
canopy, right? And that requires climbing. So you can
go up and get really, really large amounts of
fruit, and I've and I've seen this in person
in um in Malaysia, um, but the big one.
Is honey. Um, HONEY is pretty much the sweetest
food in nature. Uh, IT'S really delicious. It's highly
prized by all, all societies, um, but of course
it comes with a catch, which is that, uh,
it is produced and heavily defended by stinging, uh,
insects, honeybees, right? Um, AND that, and that brings
us to a whole other, you know, sort of
topic, which is how do you get, um, honey
out of a tree and so humans are are
quite good at using Um, technologies, um, you know,
smoke and fire, and, um, plant extracts, compounds, um,
to sort of calm the bees down or they
sometimes go honey hunting at night, you know, I've,
I've seen this. I was on a honey hunting
trip up in the, uh, Thai border, um, a
couple of years ago where people were climbing a
just an enormous tree about 2 in the morning,
um. With very little technological assistance. They weren't wearing
harnesses, uh, these men were only wearing shorts. Um,
THEY did it at night because it kind of
confuses the bees. So they, they climb up and
they go out to the nest, which the species
called Apis dorso of the giant Asian honeybee is,
uh, kind of below the branch, kind of like
a crescent, and they go up to it and
they'll just get a big torch and kind of
just burn the bees off of each side, and
then cut off the honey, put it into Put
it into a container and then kind of lower
it down with a, with a pulley system. But
I was always shocked that they actually did not
want to wear any kind of, uh, protection, like
a bee suit. Um, THEY felt that by being
clean and by wearing as little clothes as possible,
that that was, uh, helpful because the bees wouldn't
be able to detect them through various sensory modalities.
Um, SO, and then when you get honey, it
can be massive amounts, right? Like you can have
100+ kilograms, um, in a single outing, uh, with,
with aposada. There's, there's an astounding statistic from uh
the Mbuti population in Africa that, uh, during the
honey season, um, that they eat up to 2
kg per person per day of honey. Uh, WHICH
is an extraordinary amount of honey. I mean, it
actually sounds kind of gross, uh, it might make
you sick, um, but, but these are populations that
are, of course, food limited and, um, honey is
very nutritious. So, um, yeah, I think honey would
have been a really uh important reason to be
climbing for, uh, early hominins as well as obviously
humans today.
Uh, WHICH is interesting because if we were thinking
about someone living in an industrialized society, if you
weigh 2 kg of honey in a single day,
you would probably have diabetes,
right? Well, exactly, that's what's, that's what's amazing about
this is that, uh, I think, um, you know,
like I said, they're they're food limited in that
environment and, and so it seems to be OK
for them.
So, uh, let me just ask you, I'm asking
you this because it just came to my mind
and now and then I think we see it
in movies, but I, I want to ask you
if it's something just fictional or if it also
happens in reality. So, do humans ever use trees
to get away from predators, for example?
Oh yeah, um, I think they do. I think,
I think quite a bit. Uh, WE actually found
a lot of examples of that in the ethnographic
record. Um, WHEN you're out foraging, uh, hunting or
gathering, um, you can come across, uh, animals that
that might see you as prey, and so there's
a particularly memorable, um, report that I read of
a group of peeries. Which are apparently quite formidable
when there's a lot of them, um, attacking, I
think, um, Maybe an Aceh man, this would be
in Paraguay, um, and he had to kind of
go up into a tree until they, until they
went away. Um, I'll also say that in my
own experience in Malaysia. Um, I've, I've heard of
several instances of people running into trees when they
were attacked by tigers. Um, IN fact, last summer
I was with a man who pulled his shirt
up and showed me claw marks on his back
that, uh, were from an event where he was
in the forest and a tiger attacked him and
he had to jump into a tree. Sometimes it's
kind of the The last resort. Um, I think
lucky for these people, they're, they're very good at
climbing and they'd be very capable. Um, IF it
was myself running from a, from a predator, I
don't think I would be, um, you know, nearly
as lucky to get high enough in the tree
to escape.
Yeah. Yeah, yeah, me neither. But, uh, I mean,
but how proficient are humans at climbing trees compared
to other animals? I mean, how good are we?
Yeah, it's a good question, and I think the
answer is we're not as good as other animals,
right? We definitely are, in a sense, committed terrestrial
bipeds. But I think that like our whole point
in this body of literature is that that we're
way better than we think that we are, and
therefore hominids in the past who had to climb
trees for survival were were probably very good. Um,
SO what we did in our study was we
looked at actual performance of human climbing. So we
can look at how fast, uh, humans climb trees,
we can look at, um, Uh, like how much
they climb per day, right, things like that, um,
and then, and then a few other things that
I'll mention in a moment, but on, on those
metrics, uh, it's actually pretty comparable. Um, SO humans
can climb trees pretty fast, um. Not too much
slower than a, uh, let's say a chimpanzee or
something like that. Um They also, you know, we've
already talked about how much time is spent, um,
in the trees, but sometimes they will climb large
amounts per day. Like I was saying, the, the
Batek in Malaysia climb 50 m trees on a
daily basis. So that turns into actually a lot
of, a lot of up and down, right? Uh,
THAT can, that can burn up a lot of
energy. Um, AND there's some other primates that actually
don't even climb as much, uh, during the day.
Now some primates that we think of as being
arboreally adapted. Like orangutans, chimps, gorillas, they actually spend,
you know, less time in trees than some human
groups do. Uh, SOMETIMES like the males of those
species are actually too big to spend much time,
much time in trees. So when you look at
the raw numbers, um, actually humans aren't aren't quite
as bad as as we might think, and we
did a study a couple years ago. Looking at
um this question of how are humans able to
get closer to the tree, get closer to the
substrate, so they can climb, uh, efficiently, right? When
you go to a rock wall and, and you're
climbing, you know, it's, it's certainly easier to climb
when you are close to that, uh, wall, and
that's because Um, you know, there's less mass farther
away, so you're using less muscle, um, energy expenditure,
basically to, to support yourself. And so we did
a study looking at, um, the ankle dorsiflexion of
hunter-gatherers when they climb trees. So basically how much
the ankle is flexing when they put it up
against the tree. Um, And they do this because,
you know, with that big toe, we have to,
uh, being oriented to the front. We have to
climb in sort of a different way than some
other primates do. And this is a really fun
thing that we've documented. Um, SO, what people will
do is they will walk up the tree where
you kind of lean back like this and put
your foot flat against it. It's called like the
lay back technique. You see in rock climbing too.
Um, And then you just kind of lean back.
Um, AND this, uh, reduces the amount of, of,
you know, energy, um, that, that you're using. But
this is a way that hominids, I think, could
have climbed, despite having increasingly long legs. Um, ANOTHER
way they do it is by taking the big
toe. And, you know, our big toes, we, we
wear shoes, we develop wearing shoes, um, throughout childhood.
And so our feet tend to be very like,
Um, you know, forward, right? And very, uh, like,
uh, you know, clumped together, kind of, they're almost
like stuffed into a shoe. Um, BUT if you
go, you know, live with the populations in Malaysia
and Africa, their feet, I mean, they literally look
like this. They're splayed out completely like this, um,
and the big toe is almost kind of out
to the side in some cases, and this is
because of this. Uh, DEVELOPMENTAL history of, um, not
wearing shoes, of being in touch with your environment,
of, of walking up hills and having to grip
into the, the mud to like pull yourself up.
Um, AND so as a result, they have very
strong feet, and they can actually grab vines with
their big toe, kind of like this, and, and
climb up. Um, AND so I, I thought that
was amazing because we think of our big toe
is basically just useless for other things other than
You know, walking and running, but it's actually been
co-opted, um, in climbing behavior in very kind of
interesting ways. And what we found with the, with
the ankle dorsal flexion was that um people who
do, who, who climb trees regularly are able to
flex their Their ankles to a degree that in
you or me would probably break our ankles. Um,
IT'S, it's about the same as what chimpanzees do.
And this again is probably from a lifetime of
climbing. And so, you know, we've argued that in
these kinds of environments where you have to climb
often, um, we have that phenotypic plasticity that can
allow you to become a very good tree climber
and parallel the performance metrics of great apes in
some surprising ways.
Oh, OK. So, people in traditional societies who regularly
climb trees also have different and some anatomical differences
in terms of their like with feet, legs, and
stuff like that.
Well, I think it's still kind of an open
question. Um, CERTAINLY from an anecdotal perspective, like I
was just saying, their feet look way different, um,
they're gonna end up being, uh, stronger. Um, I
don't, I wouldn't say it's necessarily a genetic effect,
but it could simply be just, um, use throughout,
um, used throughout life, right? Um, THAT enables them
to be, to be really good climbers, yeah.
And the fact that we are bipedal animals, does
that have any effect on our ability to climb
trees? I mean, did it have any negative impact,
the fact that we became bipedal?
Well, I think unquestionably, um, it does. Uh, THE
previous thinking on it was that it basically made
arborealism impossible uh for humans, right? By moving that
big toe to the front, you lose your grasping
ability, so you can't hang out in trees anymore.
And what me and my colleagues have argued is
that, yes, it does compromise it, but not to
the extent commonly, um. Assumed. Now, there's also other
aspects of human anatomy. So, you know, hominins became
generally taller throughout human evolutionary history. Uh, THIS is
also gonna make tree climbing a little tougher because
of what I mentioned before, where, you know, with
that big toe being where it is, uh, one
of your options for climbing the tree is to
kind of lean back and that's, that's just gonna
be harder if you have a really long limb.
But there's another way that people actually climb trees
that you see in some non in some non-human
primates too. Which is called uh the frog style.
And this is where you take your legs and
they're kind of splayed out, and imagine that my
coffee cup is a tree, you would kind of
be around it like this, where your legs are
out, right? Um. And so that's a way of,
again, getting around having really long legs. What's really
cool actually, I'll just make a quick note is
that in these populations that they have many different
words for different styles of free climbing. Um, THE
way that you position your foot and your legs,
there's a different vocabulary for all of it. And
so that just goes to show the heritage of
tree climbing having an impact on the language and
the way that that people, you know, see the
world. But when we look at other, other traits
like having um a long Achilles tendon and other
kind of soft tissue adaptations, um, you know, we're
not really using that uh elastic mechanism when we
climb trees unless you were to do it really
fast. And I think it is possible, but frankly,
this stuff hasn't been, uh, studied enough, um, to,
to come to any firm conclusions, but Again, I
think my main argument would be that, uh, while
bipedalism does compromise, uh, compromise tree climbing behavior, um,
that's, it's much more complicated than, um, I think
we made it out to be previously. And that's,
that should impact how we, uh, view fossil hominins
and what their capabilities were.
Right. So now talking a little bit about running,
one interesting thing I read in your work is
that you've done work on different techniques, different running
techniques that people have across human society. So, what
are the different kinds of techniques out there?
Yeah, so anthropologists for a long time, kind of
like what we've been talking about, we're really interested
in how, uh, culture and ecology impact, uh, behavior,
right? Impact what, what we do. Now, um, running
is something that, that, you know, in industrialized society
we do, we do as exercise, um, you know,
for fun, um, but it's not something that's actually
been studied a whole lot. There are, of course,
some very prominent hypotheses about, um, endurance running and
persistence hunting. Um, BUT my colleagues and I were
kind of interested in, in some of the nitty
gritty mechanics of how people are, are actually running
and how this depends on, uh, on cultural context.
Now, when we go for a run, um, chances
are that you have a, a really thick soled
shoe, uh, that gives you a lot of, a
lot of cushion. And so when you have that,
what what tends to happen is that when you
run, you land on your rear foot. So if
this is your foot, you'd be landing on uh
on your heel, basically, right? Right. Now, if I
were to say take that shoe off and run
barefoot, your running uh mechanics would, would change, OK?
And they would change because you wouldn't want to
be landing with a really high impact force on
Your heel. And this is actually in a sense
a suboptimal uh way of running, cause if you
think about it, if you're really uh striding out
and hitting on your heel, then you're actually kind
of breaking. Uh, RIGHT when you land. And if
you're wanting to propel yourself, why would you break?
Because then you just have to exert more energy
to get yourself going again, right? Um, SO we
refer to that as suboptimal running mechanics, and there's
been a lot of biomechanical studies and energetic studies,
um, done on this. So it's more efficient when
you run to land on your fore foot or
midfoot, and that means that you're a little bit
like straighter when you run and you avoid this
uh what I'm referring to here is over striding
of hitting on, you know, the kind of the
back of your foot. And so there's been a,
a body of studies recently, um, one of which
was ours showing uh variation in running technique across
societies. We can basically ask which societies run with
more optimal techniques and which with more suboptimal techniques
and why might you have those differences.
OK, and what are perhaps some of the determinants
here? I mean, what's behind the kind of dominant
technique that we see in each society?
Well, there's probably a lot of factors, but one
that we were looking at is whether there is
a heritage of long distance running in the society,
right? So, um, a population like the Taramara of
Mexico that's been studied quite a bit, uh, they
have a long documented history of running for, uh,
you know, going after prey animals, but then more
recently and kind of more ritualistic, um, behavior. On
the other hand, you might have societies, you know,
kind of like the ones I work in, rainforest
hunter gatherers, where I've never seen people run unless
they're playing like a game of soccer for fun.
But being in the in the jungle, um, it's
not a great place to go running because of
all the things that are on the ground, basically,
um, it wouldn't really make a whole lot of
sense. Um, SO what you might think then is
that in those societies that have this heritage of
running, um, especially in a fitness relevant context, like
hunting. Like hunting game, that they would evince more
optimal running mechanics and those societies that don't. And
there's only a few studies that can really shed
light on this, but it does, the, the, the
current pattern in these societies does kind of match
up. So when you look at societies that have
a heritage of running in a fitness relevant context,
we do find that they are using more optimal
running mechanics, um. Sorry, and this raises the question
of why, right? And there's, there's kind of two
possibilities. One is, it could it just be a
kind of self self optimization. And, and humans are
actually pretty good at, at doing this, right? Like
when you walk around on a daily basis, uh,
just like walking around town, uh, you will end
up, most likely, unless you're like in a rush
or something, you'll end up most likely walking at
the speed that reduces what we call that that
minimizes rather. What we call the the the uh
cost of transport, which is basically how much energy
your body is burning, um, per per unit mass
per distance walked, and um and that's basically what
you feel as comfortable, right? So one argument can
be made that it's something like that, uh, where,
you know, if you're running a lot, you should
fall into a more kind of optimal state because
you're engaging in energy savings. Let's let's say if
you're doing long distance running and doing this for
20+ kilometers. Um, ANOTHER way to think about it,
uh, that is not mutually exclusive would be the
role of social learning, right? So, humans learn a
lot from each other. We observe each other, um,
we, we watch what other people do, and then
we adopt those behaviors because we trust from our
prestigious colleagues that this is a a good way
to do things. Um, SO there may be an
element of that as well, where people are kind
of observing what other people, especially those who are
good at it, what they're doing, and then we
kind of adopt it. Um, THERE'S not a whole
lot of data on what people are observing when
it comes to athletic feats in these societies. I
think that would be interesting to explore, but I
would, I would guess that it's probably a combination
of, of these two, and it's just that if
this is a behavior that's really relevant in your
society, then you're gonna more likely be doing it
in this kind of um more optimal way.
So this culture also influence at least to some
extent, the, the running technique that we see across
different societies.
Yeah, exactly. Like we, we did a study with,
uh, Jimani hunter horticulturalists. This is kind of like,
um, like the botch in the sense that they
are a kind of a jungle living group, but
they, you know, they're like small scale horticulturalists. And,
uh, we documented, because there's a lot of data
on this group through what's called the Jimane Health
and Life History Project, we actually know what people
do, uh, um, like with their days with a
very high level of, of precision. And, uh, running
is not really a thing that that folks in
this population do. And then when we went and
we studied their, their uh running mechanics, and I'll
just make a quick note about how we do
this. We basically ask people to walk on a
a transect that we set up, and then we
have a a camera oriented perpendicular to that transect
and we just kind of record what they're doing.
Um, THIS isn't, this was a couple of years
ago, this isn't a super fancy way of doing
it, but then you can look at the way
that the foot is landing, um, where it's landing
in relation to the center of mass, and whether
they are doing that thing I described earlier, like
over striding. And it turned out that this group,
um, they were pretty suboptimal runners, right? They weren't
great runners from a mechanical, uh, standpoint. So that's,
that's consistent with the hypothesis that I was mentioning
earlier. And there's been some other studies um on
other kinds of pastoralists, um, populations in Africa with
different subsistence heritage, showing that, um, yeah, if if
they don't run very much, then, then yeah, it's
the same as the Tsimane, they're engaging in these,
these suboptimal mechanics. So I think um we're only
scratching the surface here. I think we need to
get a better understanding of how um People are
using their bodies across these different uh ecological and
cultural contexts, and then kind of the question you're
getting at is like, why, right? Why do we
see this variation? What is um producing it? So
that's all we can say at the moment, but
I think it's gonna be a fun area of
study in the future.
Uh, AND particularly in industrialized societies and that, that's
also the case even for professional athletes. We, we
use shoes, we walk on shoes and run on
shoes. Uh, DOES that influence in any way the
running technique that we tend to adopt?
Yeah, I think it does. Um, AND some have
even advanced the argument that with the, with the
evolution of footwear technology starting in the 1970s, kind
of driven by Nike with these really thick soles,
that actually the, the, the, the marketing, the culture
kind of changed the way that, that people run
because you gave them this really big soul and
so they, they can then overstride. Um, AND that's
had, you know, potentially really interesting impacts on our,
uh, perceptions of what is normal on our, on
our health. Um, YOU know, one thing that maybe
is obvious, but I didn't exactly mention is that
11 other issue with, with the over striding and
hitting, hitting on your heel is that you get
these higher impact forces that are traveling through your
skeleton. And so that can be associated with um
greater musculoskeletal issues, right? You know, the wear and
tear that we talk about, if you run hundreds
or thousands of miles, um, that's the that's the
kind of uh reason that the wear and tear
might eventually cause, um, you know, some kind of
injury. Um, SO I think there's uh There's a
lot going on here with uh with the cultures,
and I think it's a good argument that things
have changed relatively recently because footwear used to be
uh relatively minimal. Um, AND it goes beyond running
as well, like I see in Uh, Malaysia, where
I work, that the way that people walk is
kind of different than the way that I walk.
Um, THIS was actually referred to by, um, early
ethnographers writing about 100 years ago that, um, rainforest
people have a springy gate. And so I was
kind of like, you know, what does that mean?
But I kind of know what that is now
because I've seen it, and it's where literally you're
kind of going like this. They're really like bending
their knees as they walk, which in a sense
is kind of a If you're, if you're walking
out in the open, that's kind of a suboptimal
way to walk. Um, BUT if you're walking in
a rainforest that's full of obstacles that you could
fall over at any minute, it actually makes a
lot of sense, uh, to be walking like that,
because you're kind of like protecting yourself against the
lack of stability that could, that could happen as
a result of tree branches or, you know, clutter
in the forest. Um, I'd also seen reports, and
I, I don't know how, how true this is,
but that people in the Middle Ages used to
walk, um, a little bit differently as well in
terms of like walking with pointed toes, um. Again,
I'm not sure how, how true that is or
how we might know, you know, based on like
paintings and art and so on. But um, I
think the point stands is that what we see
now as, as being normal, might actually be tremendously
abnormal from an evolutionary perspective. And as an anthropologist,
those are exactly the kinds of questions that that
really fascinate us.
But then the kind of footwear we use and
how it influences the way we walk and run,
it can also have consequences for, I mean, how
over time, the wear and tear that happens in
our bodies,
right? Well, exactly, and one, and one reason for
that is not only higher impact forces, let's say
if you're a regular runner, but we tend to
shape technologies when it comes to ergonomic design, that
can actually have the effect of making us weaker.
Right? So you can wear these really comfortable shoes
with a high arch, they might feel great, but
this might steadily lead to a degradation of your
intrinsic foot muscles that are, are pretty small, but
they're pretty important in terms of, of you maintaining
your balance and your strength in your foot, and
that can in turn lead to Um, injuries, you
know, when we think about, um, aging and in
older age, how, uh, you know, a catastrophic fall
can often be what leads to someone having really
big health problems or, or even dying. Um, YOU
know, this could possibly be linked with how we
have been using our bodies, um, over the past
decades in industrialized society, um, where we're just Uh,
not using them in, in ways that's gonna help
us be healthy into later life, doing more complicated
three dimensional, uh, locomotion that keeps all of our,
of our joints and ligaments, and tendons and muscles
strong, rather than just the ones that we use,
um, you know, just, just walking basically. Um, SO
I think this actually has pretty important, uh, impacts
when we think about musculoskeletal health and aging.
Yeah. And so, at least when possible, do you
think that it could be beneficial for people to
walk and run barefoot?
Yeah, this is a, this is a highly debated,
um, issue, of course. And I think, I think
the answer is a, a qualified yes, because we
know that it can, that like barefoot running and
walking can help with the development of the structures
that I was just talking about. But the, the,
the problem is, is that, um, when people adopt
it, they tend to do so very, uh, quickly,
right? The kind of zeal of the convert. This
happened to me. I took up barefoot running. Maybe
10 years ago. Um, I don't, I don't do
it anymore, but I, I did it about 10
years ago. And I, I took my my Vibram
5 fingers and I went out for a, a
3-mile run. And I was in a world of
hurt the next day because my body wasn't used
to that, that way of running. I could barely
Walk. Um, NOW, I didn't get catastrophically injured, but,
but some people actually do. Um, SO I think
the key is that you have to let your
body adjust to the new footwear. But, but then
after that, it could potentially be, um, it could
potentially be beneficial. Yeah. Yeah.
So I want to get into the topic of
hunting, but just before that, one more question and
particularly from an evolutionary perspective, reproductive success is very
important. So in non-industrial societies, what are the determinants
of reproductive success?
Yeah, reproductive success is important, right? It's kind of
the currency of natural selection. So when we want
to understand how evolution and and selection have shaped
the, the human body, the, the human, um, psychology,
um, our, our behavior, uh, we want to understand.
Um, WHAT the determinants are of reproductive success in
non-industrialized societies that might better reflect ancestral, uh, conditions.
The answer is that it's a little bit complicated.
Um, IT seems like status, broadly speaking, is something
that has a big role. So whether, you know,
we can talk about that in the broad sense
as something, uh, like physical formidability, um, hunting success.
Um, POLITICAL status, um, and influence. These are traits
that, that typically correlate with reproductive success in small
scale societies, and there was a, uh, probably the
most authoritative study by, uh, Chris von Ryden and
Adrian Yage a couple of years ago showing that
this, that there is a positive correlation um across,
I think they studied like 46 non-industrialized societies or
something, um, uh. So yeah, those are those are
generally the uh ways in which this this uh
is is studied. Um, HUNTING success can be, you
know, one of those, right? So if you're a
good hunter, uh, you're bringing back food that is
nutritious, it's beneficial to, to your group, um, you
might be seen as someone who's who's highly competent.
I think where the debate really lies is what
is the exact pathway from status to reproductive. Success,
um, because it can get complicated, right? And this
gets you into all sorts of other issues in
human evolutionary studies like, well, why are men bothering
to hunt at all? And that's a whole other
topic, but um we can talk about two general
ways that happens, you know, one might be like
direct family provisioning, right? Uh, LET'S say you're part
of a nuclear family. You go hunting, you bring
food back, and you can share it with, let's
say your wife and kids, right? So that means
more food is going into their mouths, they're able
to have the energy they need to fight off
pathogens, to, to put on weight to be healthy,
and then to eventually have their own children. So
there's that route, but then there's also a more
indirect route, um, where you're using hunting as a
way almost of, of showing off, right? Um, AND
in this way, uh, it's been hypothesized that, that,
uh, men hunt, um, in order to show off
and maybe get access to mating opportunities, um, by
showing off their high quality, uh, through hunting, for
example. And so that's another way to, to get
to higher fertility, right, is to is to potentially
get more uh more partners. Um, AND kind of
between those, there's a whole lot of other complications
like, uh, political, uh, status, right? Being able to
influence other people, to have them do things for
you, uh, your role as as a leader, and
being able to influence others, uh, being able to
elicit support. Uh, RIGHT. So if you are at
the center of a network where everyone is helping
you out, your children might benefit from that and
maybe suffer a lower risk of, of, um, mortality.
And so, reproductive success has been studied in sort
of all of these ways, and I would say
that there's um general evidence of, of a relationship,
but um it's a little bit unclear exactly what
uh predicts it, right? There's been studies showing that
Um, this was among the Hadza showing that like
lower voice pitch in men predicts, um, reproductive success.
So this has something to do, it's hypothesized to
have something to do with phenotypic, uh, quality, like
in in acquiring mating opportunities. Um, ANOTHER interesting study
from a Years ago showed that in, in, in
the Bayaka group in Africa and the OGTA group
in the Philippines, that measures of network centrality were
predictive of reproductive success in, um, in these female,
and the females of these hunter gatherer groups. Um,
SO again, that goes back to the idea of
being able to elicit social support, um, to, to
sort of help, uh, your own reproductive interests. Um,
ONE of the complications with studies of reproductive success
is that humans are a really long-lived species, right?
Um, TO even do a study, uh, of this
kind of thing in the span of a few
years introduces, uh, some real complications because it would
be, uh, inherently cross-sectional, right? Um, SO you can
do all sorts of things, statistically controlling for age
and so on. Uh, THAT, that can help with
this. Um, BUT it's, it's really hard to measure.
We did a study a couple of years ago
where we have access to a data set with
the botte of Malaysia, where, um, we actually were
able to calculate lifetime reproductive success because we had
data on hunting behavior from the 70s, and that's
a very rare, a very rare thing to have.
Um BUT our study actually found no relationship with
anything. So, um We weren't able to, to predict
reproductive success in this population, but that's exactly what
you should expect, right? You expect variation. You expect
that in some populations, that these factors will have
a strong influence, whereas in other populations, maybe they
won't. One of the things that we point to
in our study is that the egalitarian nature of
a lot of hunter-gatherers um might militate against a
strong relationship between Uh, say, hunting and reproductive success.
And one way this can happen is in these
egalitarian societies like food is shared around a lot.
So you come in with a big game animal
that you've killed. Um, AND, and instead of just
giving the whole antelope to your family, there's norms
in place that dictate that you have to share
this with basically everybody, right? And so in that
way, you're kind of militating against the preferential treatment
of, say, your own offspring that could lead to
that relationship with um with uh with RS, um.
So, so there's that, and there's also leveling mechanisms
in terms of of status, right? When a, when
a coon hunter comes into camp with an antelope,
um, something happens called insulting the meat, where uh
people will say, oh well, we've seen bigger antelope
than that or it's not, it's not fat enough.
So this person that you would think would be
be able to gain status um and prestige from,
you know, being a good hunter, uh, they, what's
called cool the heart of the hunter. Um, AND
again, this could potentially militate that pathway to, to
reproductive success. So the answer is it's complicated, it's,
it's culturally, uh, dependent, but that we, we generally
do see a trend with, with, um, status and
reproductive success.
But in the particular case of hunting, does it
tie to reproductive success for both sexes or mostly
for men?
Yeah, well, that's a good question. Um, AS we'll
probably talk more about, um, in, in traditional societies,
it's, it's mostly men that do much of the
hunting. Um, SO that's kind of how it's been
analyzed because there isn't a large sample size of
instances of female hunting that you could correlate with
it. And this is, you know, this compounds the
problems of sample size and long generations that I
mentioned. Um, BEFORE, but what's interesting is that, um,
female reproductive success hasn't gotten the same kind of
attention as male, and we kind of pointed this
out in one of our papers from a few
years ago, and I think it's um unfortunate, um,
it it doesn't really make a whole lot of
sense. Part of the reason I, I think historically,
Is that, um, in, in primates, you generally do
see a higher variance in reproductive success in males
and females, and this is why you, you tend
to see highly ornamented um male primates, um, at
least in some groups of primates, um, and so,
For that reason, uh, there might be kind of
more to explain when it comes to males, but,
uh, what what the data have shown is that,
you know, you have a lot of variation in
female reproductive success too, and I think we don't
have a good explanation of why that happens. So
if we look at the The mirror of the
hunting case, you might expect that maybe, maybe gathering
success, uh, is the thing that predicts female reproductive
success. Hasn't really been tested. We, we did a
test of it, we didn't find a relationship. Um,
BUT I think that because scholars are paying more
attention now to what, to what women are doing,
to how they are engaging in cooperative systems in
their societies, um, we're gonna have a better idea
of, of how that works. And One of the
studies I mentioned before was actually on women, showing
that that network centrality basically of um women in
two hunter-gatherer societies did predict reproductive success. And so
that kind of makes a lot of sense, right?
It, it kind of dictates your access to resources.
And so in that sense, being a good cooperative
partner, being, being friendly, being generous, um, probably is
what's gonna Uh, really mediate that path in females,
but I, but I wish I had a better
answer for you. We need to study it more.
Uh, BUT, uh, I mean, when we talk about
hunting, does it include both big game and small
game or just big game?
Um, YEAH, it depends how, you know, the specific
context in which we're talking about it. But all
of these studies that I've been talking about, they
would, they would be combining them, essentially. I mean,
one of, one of the big differences between big
game and small game is in how it gets
shared out. Uh, LARGE game tends to be shared
out camp wide, and I'm, I'm really generalizing here
with hunter gatherers, but But that's generally what we,
what we see, whereas smaller game, um, may be
the kind of thing that you just kind of
consume with your family, um, and so those those
are sometimes kind of treated, treated differently, and um,
we do see that that women do hunt, uh,
small game pretty often in some in some societies
where they don't typically go after uh large game.
And so that's one of these axes of the
division of the sexual division of labor. That we
see in hunter gatherer societies.
But then women, of course, I'm not saying here
that men or women hunt at er at higher
rates or which one of them hunts at higher
rates, but women also participate in hunting them.
Right? Yeah, they do, and it's something that I
think um doesn't receive enough attention. I think it
kind of has recently, as we'll probably talk about.
Um, BUT when we go back to thinking about
like the early study of human origins, going back
100 years ago, or or even more actually, um,
hunting was really the, the centerpiece. It was thought
to be the driving factor that made humans different
from the other primates, right? It's what allowed us
to stand up on two legs, to use complex
tools so that we could hunt them and then
butcher them. Um, AND it also was thought to
facilitate, uh, cooperation, especially among males who would be,
you know, going after the, the mammoth or whatever
it is, um, to, to kill it, and then,
and then share that food with the group. Um,
AND so this, you know, you can refer to
this as like the idea of, of man the
hunter, which is kind of a complicated idea that
links with the, the hunting hypothesis, but it has
been. A relatively male kind of centric idea. And
so, I think for that reason, instances of female
hunting in hunter gatherer societies, um, they, they have
been overlooked. And um I think in the past
30 or 40 years, they have gotten some attention.
So if we go back to um the man
the Hunter conference, which uh was a conference that
happened at the University of Chicago in 1966. It
was really the start of modern hunter gatherer studies
where you had this group of people that came
together who had worked with different societies around the
globe and said, OK, what can we learn about
prehistory from modern variation in hunter gatherers, and that's
kind of how we think about it uh today.
And there were a lot of, you know, important
results of that conference, including the idea of the
original affluent society that Um, hunter gatherers don't work
very hard, that life wasn't this constant struggle for
existence. There is also the, um, The uh finding
by Richard Lee, uh, showing that women produced much
more food than previously thought, mostly in the form
of gathering. So that was highly influential, but what,
what people sometimes forget is that at the Man
the Hunter conference, there was actually a paper that
that was um quite concerned with women's hunting, um,
by a scholar named Watanabe, uh, studying the Ainu
hunter-gatherers of Japan, where he documented quite a bit
of female participation. In, um, in hunting, going after
a small game, and then in the years after
that, there were a lot uh more reports of
women's hunting that that came up, and perhaps the
most famous one comes from the Ogta. Of the
Philippines where um the women hunt probably just as
much as the men do, and they use bows
and arrows, which is something you don't see, uh,
I mean, maybe anywhere else. Um, AND so that
was a, that's a really fascinating study, and there's
there's been some other examples as well. Um, BUT
I think that's a really important example of um
flexibility in the human sexual division of labor, that
even though it exists, there is this flexibility and
um it's not just only men doing the hunting,
women sometimes do it. Um, AS well, so it's
been a really interesting change in sort of how
we view subsistence and the contribution by the sexes.
OK, but what were the main claims coming from
the man the hunter idea? I mean, what did
people say back then?
Well, um, it depends exactly what kind of, uh,
what meaning of Man the Hunter we're talking about
here, right? The, the, the conference man the Hunter
that happened in '66 and then led to that
book in, in '68 was interesting because the title
itself belies the contents of, of the book. Um,
THE, the hunting hypothesis, the kind of classical idea
of man the hunter, there was one chapter in
that book by um Uh, Washburn, uh, Sherwood Washburn,
he was very prominent, uh, proponent of this, um,
but it was basically this idea that that male
provisioning was, was super critical, like, you know, mostly
revolving around, um, hunting, and that idea kind of
carried with it a few auxiliary claims about women
that that were kind of put out there, but
they weren't really um challenged at the time. And
so one of them was that Well, because women
are, and they'll use phrases like burdened by childcare,
um, by offspring, that they're not able to leave
a central place. So they have to stay home
all day, essentially, right? Um, SO, OK, well, fair
enough from one perspective, right? Childbearing is, uh, difficult,
it's energetically costly, it's hard to hunt when, when
you have kids, um, but people at the time,
it was kind of a missed opportunity because there
was that focus on On the evolution of male
cooperation, but they weren't looking at the ways that
that females were cooperating themselves, that were participating in
subsistence, right? This is what Richard Lee showed, lots
of vegetables coming into camp. And so, if hunting
is the kind of thing that you need long
hours to go out to do, um, where you
can't be disturbed with children, then according to that
idea, women would like never go hunting at all.
It would just be impossible. Um, BUT I think
what the later work showed is that there are
ways in which you can overcome the constraints of
having a very expensive and, um, you know, loud,
uh, child. I, I have kids now and I,
I couldn't, you know, it's, it's hard to do
anything with them, um, much less go and like
do ambush hunting. So, so I think there is
definitely some Some truth to that, but we do
see that women hunt, and so it raises the,
the kind of more interesting question is like, well,
how do they do it? What are the ways
in which um that they do it, that that
can overcome these constraints and allow them to kind
of pursue, to pursue their, their interests and goals,
and that's what we've, you know, partially been studying.
So, uh, but, but nowadays, I mean, almost uh
almost 6 decades after the man the Hunter conference.
What are people debating nowadays when it comes to
gender differences in hunting and the sexual division of
labor?
Uh, YEAH, interesting question. Well, I think, I think
these days, uh, people have been pointing again to
instances of women's hunting, um, which I think is
great. I think it's, it's, it's excellent that people
are being exposed to this kind of diversity in
human behavior. I think where a mistake gets made
though is that this is being equated with the
lack of an existence of a sexual division of
labor. Um. Now, before talking about this, I think
it's important to note that um that women's contributions
have definitely been overlooked or or downplayed um through
time, and part of the reason for that is
that many early ethnographers um were male, and so
they were, you know, observing um male activity more,
right? They were just sort of seeing their corner
of, of, of the world, um, and so women's
contributions kind of writ large, I think we're not.
Uh, AS paid attention to as they as they
definitely should have been. Again, Richard Lee is the
one that kind of, that kind of changed that.
Um, BUT that being said, uh, if we look
at the, at the hard data of what people
do in these societies, what, what you men and
women do, and I think that there is really
robust evidence, um, even taking, taking into account some
of these of these biases we have to acknowledge,
um, that there that there is still a pretty
dichotomous pattern. Um, MEANING that men tend to do
one, certain kinds of activities, and women tend to
do other kinds of activities. And one of those
is that men tend to do more hunting, and
the way that they hunt is different, and women
tend to do less, while on the other hand,
they do more gathering. And there's other differences too
in terms of like, um, the amount of time
you spend toward like constructing things like building tools
versus um dealing with children and things like that.
Um. So it is still possible to talk about
there being differences while still acknowledging that the border
is porous, and that given how flexible humans are
culturally and biologically, we should expect these uh patterns
to vary around the globe, and that is what
we see, right? So, um, There's actually a latitudinal
trend with the sectional division of labor, where it
tends to be a little bit more similar near
the tropics versus at higher um latitudes. And I
think this is probably something that's characterized human and
pre-human existence um potentially going uh pretty far back.
Um, SO that's kind of what's being debated these
days, whether that even exists, um, and, uh, women's
hunting has kind of come to, uh, the center
of, of that, but, you know, it's, I think
it's shed an important, uh, you know, spotlight on
Uh, previous biases that that have existed, but then
also the ways that scholars um have and also
have not been biased in particular ways. Like, we
have to ask ourselves, when we look at the
ethnographic record now, um, how biased is it in
these ways? And I think we actually have ways,
statistically, methodologically now of actually dealing with uh these
kinds of issues so that it becomes an empirical
question, um, to, to actually examine, yeah.
Right. But do we know or do we have
a good idea of what are the factors that
play a role in women's hunting and, I mean,
the rates they do it, the kinds of hunting
they participate in, like, for example, large game versus
small game, what factors play a role there?
Yeah, so me and um one of my students,
uh, Jordi Hoffman, uh, recently conducted a study on
this because I had seen scattered reports of, of
women's hunting, um, but, um, I really wanted to
know, OK, if we look cross culturally, what are
these really big factors. And I think, I think
to look at this is helpful to go to
a specific example, um, so I'll go back to
the Agda, that group I mentioned earlier, where the
women hunt quite a bit. And when we see
them hunting a lot, we can ask, OK, well,
what is it about the society that uh that
allows them to engage in in so much hunting.
Um, ONE is that they use dogs. OK, OK,
so there's like this technological element here. Um, DOGS
can be really helpful in, um, finding game, uh,
in tracking it down, and then in killing it.
Uh, SO you have this kind of extra hand,
this extra aid. Um, NOW, men will use dogs
as well, but you, you sort of see it
in, in, in nearly all these instances of women's
hunting, um, uh, using, using dogs. I'd have to
go back to the paper to look at the
the exact data, but Um, yeah, dogs, um, whether
it's, uh, the hunting occurs close to camp, OK?
So this again gets at the, the idea of,
well, OK, if you, if you have some kids
that you're taking care of, um, it, it'll be
much easier to go hunting if you don't have
to go very far. You can either bring them
with you, um, or maybe you could leave them
back at home. And that relates to probably the
the biggest one, which is Allocare, right? Um, YOU
know, based on the work of Sarah Hrdy and
others, we've, we've known now for, for a little
while that, you know, potentially what what really makes
us human is our ability to ability to uh
cooperate and to share the burden of childcare, right?
uh BETWEEN both men and women. And uh this
is something that also facilitates women's hunting. So, uh,
you can leave a kid back uh at the,
at the home base while you go out hunting,
that's fine. But we also see cases where groups
of women go out. Um, TOGETHER in mixed age
groups, so that you'll have, you know, like a
14 or 15 year old girl who isn't hunting,
but she actually watches all the kids. So it's
kind of like having like a daycare, but out
in the, but out in the jungle, right? And
and this is what I mean when we talk
about the early talk about man the hunter, where
like, washroom is so focused on, well, hunting promotes
cooperation in men, but It wouldn't, they wouldn't have
had to look very far to see this behavior
already occurring among hunter gatherer societies, and it's a
critical behavior that that women are doing, um. So,
yeah, uh, alo care and then hunting in groups,
so you don't typically see women out hunting alone
for, for I think a variety of reasons. Um,
WOMEN'S hunting, you know, related with the, the other
points I made about distance, uh, it tends to
be like a shorter duration. Um, IT tends to
occur with husbands a lot, so oftentimes men and
women. Uh, SORRY, husbands and wives will team up,
uh, to go hunting, and in most cases it's,
it's the man who ends up like actually killing
the animal. So in a sense, he kind of
gets the glory, but there's so many reports out
there of of women who are really good at
tracking themselves. So there's reports of like, uh, you
know, men are going out and women are coming
back from gathering, and they'll say, hey, we saw
signs of an antelope over there, you want to
go here and go this way. Right, so they're
like participating in hunting in a really critical kind
of informational capacity, um. And that's the kind of
thing that may have been missed in kind of
earlier, uh, earlier ethnographic studies. Um, SO there's that,
um, and then they tend to use different kinds
of, of tools, and they go after, uh, smaller
game. So they'll go after a game that is
kind of, you know, less than 15 kg or
so, um, a game that you don't need to
maybe hunt for 2 or 3 days straight, like
endurance hunting. Um, ALTHOUGH there are examples of that,
uh, for, for women, um, but, you know, game
that might, uh, go and like hide in a
tree and then you can like burn it out
or stab it or something like that. Um, YOU
see, you see a lot of examples of that,
um. And yeah, they tend to be uh using
different tool kits and men, so um they'll often
use their digging sticks to kill animals, right? So
it kind of, it's a potent weapon that that
doubles as a hunting and gathering implement. So there's
all these ways, right, in which it's, it's um.
Uh, YOU know, these are the ways that that
women hunt, and it's, it's a, it's a little
bit different than the way that that men hunt,
but it's kind of consistent with the constraints of
their lives that they're, uh, that they're facing, and,
and, and that's how they do it, yeah.
Does, does the fact that women get pregnant influence
rates of hunting in any way?
Um, YEAH, well, that's an interesting question. So one
of the predictions of our study was that we
would see hunting more often. In the pre-childbearing years
as well as in the post-childbearing years. Um, I
think it's a sensible prediction, but we actually didn't
find a whole lot of evidence for it ethnographically,
and I should say this is by doing um
a large scale ethnographic survey using the human relations
area files, which kind of um collects together a
bunch of ethnographic reports that you can search, right?
So this is like a, a broad cultural study.
It's not just one place. So we didn't find
um Much evidence for that exactly. And I think
it's because it's going back to what I talked
about a moment ago, which is about alloca is
that women exist within these cooperative networks, um, in
which they're they're still able to sometimes Go hunting
and and do these kinds of things, even when
they have, uh, even when they have kids. I
mean, there's no doubt that having kids is gonna
um reduce your foraging effort to some extent, that's
actually been widely documented in in forgers, but it's
not impossible, right? And that's an important, uh, that's
an important distinction.
Right. And do we know if cultural restrictions, for
example, social norms against women hunting play any role
at all in limiting women's participation in hunting across
human societies?
Yeah, they do and they don't, and it depends
where you look. I think in, in kind of
uh debates these days, there's there's a bit of
an assumption that, um, women would be doing hunting
everywhere if only they would be allowed by men
to do it. And I think that that's kind
of a dangerous perspective to have. We actually need
to look at the ethnographic record and see what
people are are doing. And so there are some
cases where there are taboos or rules against women's
hunting. Um, SO, for example, they might be not
allowed to touch a spear or touch a bow
and arrow, right? Um, OR something bad might happen
or that's the way I think about it. And
so in those cases, um, you wouldn't have direct
participation in hunting at least using those implements. Um,
THERE'S also, well, I, I should note one way
that that that that they get around that is
by simply using different kinds of tools, right? So
we documented societies where they're, uh, there's taboos against
using some kind of implements, but none against using
others, and so they end up hunting, but just
not with like, for example, a bow and arrow.
OK. Um, NOW there's also other, um, kind of
cultural restrictions around menstruation. Uh, THERE'S a, a wide
variety of, of, of taboos in, in, in small
scale societies about this, uh, that it might scare
off animals or something like that. We found that
in, in some of the study, in in some
of the populations we looked at, um, but not
in others. And again, you see the same thing
where there might be some kind of um A
norm or or taboo around this, but then you
find that the women are actually like helping their
husbands get seals or something like that. Right, um,
so it doesn't completely negate or or dictate, um,
the, the behavior, um, and I think that's, that's
kind of the big finding from from our study,
which is that uh there are some cultural restrictions,
but it doesn't completely mean that women aren't going
to be hunting. And what I've pointed to in
my work is specifically the case of of very
gender egalitarian societies where you have um very few
restriction uh restrictions on what women are allowed to
do. And yet in these societies, you still see
very classic divisions of labor, right? Again, it's, it
works against this point that women would be doing
exactly what men do, um, if they were allowed
to, um, and I think it's useful to have
this perspective of of like in these societies, women
are are given the freedom to what to do
what they wanna do, but they don't want to
be hunting in a lot of cases. In fact,
they want the men to do the hunting. There's
a famous uh story from the Kung where uh
Richard Lee talks about how, uh, You know, women
are constantly berating the men for not hunting enough.
Um, THEY want them to hunt more so they
can bring more meat back, and the women actually
refer to hunting as being boring cause you're out
all day, it's usually unsuccessful, right? Um, AND that's
like, that's like the big difference, um, in, in,
in the sex roles and hunting is that, uh,
That that the men in a sense can afford
the time to be away for hours at a
time to, to, to fail in hunting, which they
do like 90% of the time, kind of on
average, um, whereas women tend to go after the
things that are that are more certain, like, um,
like gathering or or the smaller prey that we
that we talked about. Um, SO in these egalitarian
societies, it shows that, um, women are kind of
pursuing their own goals and as part of that,
they're actually not including hunting in their, in their
behavioral profiles all that much, but it's important to
note that that is in a big sense, it's
their decision, right? It's not being foisted upon them.
There's a great anecdote um from the 1970s in
Kirk Endicott's book, The Head Man Was a Woman
of the Bok, where um There was a 14
year old girl who got really into blowpipe hunting,
and this is something that that women never do
in the bate, got really into blowpipe hunting, and
no one cared. They thought it was great. Um,
SHE even caught some things, but as time went
on, and she got to, you know, be 1920,
and so on, um, she kind of just gave
it up. I guess she lost interest in it,
or, you know, she went into the more sort
of traditional role in botech society had kids and
so on. Um, BUT, but again, it's not like
people were telling her, no, you, you can't hunt
because you're a woman. Uh, SO I, I thought
that's a very telling, um, a very telling anecdote.
Mhm. So let me ask you about a recent
paper of yours titled Woman the Hunter, Female Foragers
sometimes Hunt, Yet Gender divisions of Labor are Real
where you criticize a paper by Abigail Anderson at
all titled The Myth of Men the Hunter, Women's
Contribution to the Hunt Across Ethnographic Contexts. Uh, AND,
uh, I mean, I, I'm asking you about this
mainly because I, I would imagine that the two
main issues about, that you point out about their
paper. Uh, ARE probably some of the issues we,
or you think we would see across some of
these debates. You point to a biased sampling of
the ethnographic record and the second one is uh
mis miscoding. So, could you explain those two issues?
Yeah, sure. Um, SO the, so the goal of
that paper, uh, was to determine a, a frequency
of hunting of women's hunting across, um, hunter gatherer
societies, right? Um, WHICH is an interesting question. I
think that's a, that's a cool thing to explore.
Um, NOW, now to, to go about it, um,
I think that things got a little bit problematic
because when they want to estimate the, the frequency,
you have to have, you know, the number of
societies in which women are hunting. Divided by the
number of total societies, right? And the point that
we make in our paper is that is that
that's a very difficult calculation to make first of
all. Um, I think it's great someone is is
trying, but uh the problem was sort of that
numerator and the denominator. So the denominator, like your
total sample, let's say all hunter gatherer societies, um,
they use a database called called DPlace, which is
kind of a repository of Um, information about small
scale societies, including hunter gatherers, and from that, They
wanted to determine um uh the the societies in
which they were like uh appropriate descriptions of hunting,
and then of those, which ones had women's hunting.
So it's um it's a, that's a fine strategy
as far as it goes, but what we discovered
in our sort of nitty gritty investigation of that
is that it ended up being a bias sample
in the sense that um they weren't including a
lot of societies in that. DENOMINATOR that probably should
have been uh included, right? And so that has
the effect then when you, when you calculate it
is if the if if the bottom number um
is kind of artificially reduced in some kind of
way, it leads to a higher um it leads
to a higher frequency. And so that's kind of
one of our main critiques is that you need
to have a really unbiased sampling strategy to arrive
at At your frequency, um, value. And again, it's,
it's a really hard thing to do, um, but,
uh, there seemed to be a few ways in
which the data were selectively chosen to inflate uh
that value, and I'm and I wouldn't claim that
they were um even doing this, uh, um, in
some kind of unethical or a purposeful way, um,
but just that this can sometimes happen. And we
have methods and sort of cross cultural studies that
I think may have been useful there, uh, to
avoid that kind of, of bias. And so they,
they arrived at the value of 80%, um, which
is about um 5 to 8 times higher than
what you saw previous estimates of the societies in
which women hunt. And this is when we really
get into, you know, like the devil's the details
kind of thing, because what does it mean to
code a society is one in which Women hunt,
and this gets into that second point you were
asking about of of miscoding. I think that I
think the the biggest issue with that paper was
that a society in which there was a report
of a rare instance of of women hunting, um,
was coded the very same as the Ogta in
which women hunt. Regularly. So in other words, I
think that for this to be meaningful, we really
need to have a measure of the frequency at
which women are hunting for this to be um
useful exercise. And so in our uh response paper,
that that's what we did is where we actually
went back to all the instances that were that
were coded, and we tried to get some kind
of frequency estimate when when possible, um. And, uh,
you know, our answer was was very different, which
was that it's more in line with what we've
thought previously in which women's hunting is is relatively
uh rare, but it still does happen, but it's
very much along the lines of what I was
saying earlier of like the way in which women
hunt, whereas this new paper was claiming that big
game hunting occurred pretty regularly and um I don't
think the data bear that out. And so when
we talk about the coding errors, that's kind of
An example of them of, of, you know, not
putting frequency in and of miscoding large and small
game of um double coding societies like the the
Kun and the Jinwani where they're the same society,
but they were coded separately with different frequencies of
hunting. Um, SO, so cases like that I think
need to really be scrutinized carefully and all of
this had the effect of making it look like
women's hunting is really, really common. Um, LEADING to
newspaper articles that said women in the past have
always hunted as much as men. Now, as I've
said earlier, I would freely grant the proposition that
um women's subsistence has been undervalued, that women's hunting
has been undervalued, but at the same time, I
think we're going uh way too far the other
way to say that these things have been, um,
occurring at equal frequency in these hunter gatherer societies
or throughout um human evolution, and I think we
need to Uh, kind of look at the data
as they are rather than as we, as we
want them to be.
And by the way, another point that you make
in your response paper is that you say that
focusing too much on hunting diminishes the value of
other contributions that more commonly come from women. Could
you explain that?
Yeah, well, it gets back to this point of
we need to look at what people are actually
doing and kind of what they value. Um, MEN
and women do both very important things in their,
in their societies, and they're valued to to varying
degrees depending where you look. Um, WOMEN gather most
of the food, um, in hunter gatherer societies. Uh,
IN some cases this can be like the main
carbohydrates. Great base. Um, IT'S often what leads to
hunter-gatherer camps, moving locations, right? Um, TO have a,
a good base of carbohydrates. Um, SO that's absolutely
critical to their, to their survival. Um, CHILDCARE is
absolutely critical, and they do quite a bit more
of this than, than, uh, than men do. Um.
We, we shouldn't downplay that. I think it's, it's
super important in its own right. Um, WOMEN also
play important roles as leaders, um, as, as kind
of political influencers, as, uh, gossipers. I mean, in
any kind of way when it comes to Um,
being in a society, they're just as important as
men, but in kind of different ways. So, um,
you know, men and women are equally valuable in
these societies, um, but let's look at what they're
actually doing and how they view their contributions rather
than kind of imposing something, something onto those.
And what do you think are perhaps the merits
of this paper by Abigail Anderson and others, uh,
and possibly of other papers similar to it. I
mean, what are the merits and what is positive
about them?
Well, I think what's great is that it's leading
to these conversations, right? It's leading to this conversation,
it's leading to other, you know, great podcasts that
have been done with, um, um, with, with folks
who are writing, uh, you know, these articles, um,
and we should always be kind of questioning received
wisdom, right? We, we should always be, be questioning
what we thought before, examining our assumptions, um, thinking
about how biases might be leading us toward Um,
the wrong, the wrong path. And so I think
in that sense, it's great to be having the
conversation. And as I noted, um, I think it's
cool that someone had the idea to get a
robust cross cultural estimate of how much women, um,
hunt. I think that that it was a harder
question than the authors kind of realized at the
time. Um, IT doesn't mean that it's not worth
asking or asking again in the future. In, in
our kind of rebuttal to the paper, uh, we
kind of essentially threw our hands up and said,
I mean, until we do a more authoritative study,
we're not gonna have a good answer on what
that frequency, um, is. And, and that's OK. We
just have to, to recognize that that's, um, that
that's what it is, but, um, Um, yeah.
Uh, AND just another point that you make there
at a certain point, you say, we caution against
ethnographic revisionism that projects westernized conceptions of labor and
its value on to foraging societies. Uh, WHAT do
you mean by that?
Yeah, well, I think the, the headline that this
paper got in the newspaper El Pais, uh, kind
of, um, demonstrates this, where, you know, men and
women have always hunted equally in the past, where
we're taking these modern notions of equity, which come
from a good place, which come from, um, I
think, reasonable motivations to correct historical injustices. And they're
kind of um importing them onto other societies. And
as anthropologists, me and my colleagues are a little
bit uh concerned about that because these societies, they
don't, they don't uh necessarily not, they're not paying
attention to the kind of things that we're talking
about. Um, THEY have different norms, they have different
values, uh, than we do. Um, THEY have different
views on what men and women should be doing
or or the way that they're valuable, kind of
like I talked about earlier, like some women. Don't
even want to hunt, um, uh, right? So I
think we're at a little bit of danger here,
um, of transferring our beliefs and norms onto these
other societies that aren't really having a voice in
this conversation, um, currently, um. I think that Um,
when we think about prehistory, it certainly becomes complicated
because we don't want to think about hunter gatherers
today as being living fossils, right? Um, WHAT they
do now is what they're doing in response to
their ecological, uh, systems, in response to their environments,
and it's very possible, very likely, in fact, in
some ways that the world is very different, um.
You know, deeper in, in the past. And so
there's a big debate now like of, you know,
how far back in time does the sexual division
of, of labor go? And I think it's a
really interesting question. I would probably fall more on
the side of, um, that we probably do see
these divisions going farther back um in time. But
I think what I would question is the inherent
um assumption kind of in the conversation that that's
happening. Um, THAT that is necessarily a, a bad
thing. It can sometimes be a bad thing, because
whenever you have differences in behavior, different profiles of
behavior, this can potentially lead to inequalities, and it
definitely does, but it doesn't necessarily always have to,
nor is it necessarily um bad from like an
a priori perspective. And so I think we need
to kind of broaden our notion about. The way
that we view male and female contributions and the
value judgments that we're putting on them and realize
that, you know, especially as anthropologists that we have
a duty, uh, to not be projecting our own
views onto these other societies and to let them
speak for themselves, to let the patterns, um, speak
for themselves, and it's only through that kind of
strategy that we will really understand um human diversity
in all its forms and, and give us the
ability to appreciate them.
Mhm. And archaeologically, do we have good enough data
to make claims about rates of hunting for men
and women in ancient prehistoric societies?
Yeah, well, that's a great question. Um, Reconstructing anything
about behavior in the past can be, can be
really challenging. You know, one thing that we don't
want to do is to um assume that only
men were doing it, and maybe that's one of
the really good things to come out of this
kind of current debate is that that we want
to get away from these like really strict dichotomies.
But at the same time, um, I think that
we can look at modern hunter gatherers and look
at the The constraints they face, and the solutions
that they come up with to solve their constraints
as a way of understanding how humans would have
behaved in the past, right? Um, SO men would
have been probably show offs in the past, and
women would, um, have, have, have dealt with, you
know, uh, pregnancy and, um, young children in the
past. Um, THESE, these were constraints that operated then
as they do today, and therefore I think that
you likely would have seen the same divergence in
the sex roles. Um, IN the past, not that
it would be like identical, but it should be
variable, the same way that it's variable among, among
modern societies today. It's really hard to get a
value on like, exactly how much. People were hunting
or gather, um, you know, hunting and gathering, um,
but, uh, you know, this is the role of,
you know, ethnography and, and, and reconstruction, but there
is also fossil evidence. There's archaeological um evidence and
There was a paper that came out recently, um
by um uh Kara Okebo, Sarah Lacy, uh a
very thought provoking paper, basically arguing that there's no
evidence that there were sexual divisions of labor going
beyond, um, let's call it the agricultural revolution, right?
You know, 10 to 15,000 years ago, um, and
it's a really interesting claim, but I, I would
strongly disagree with it, I think, um, because I
think we do actually have Um, archaeological and fossil
evidence that that shows, um, differences in skeletal, um,
patterns, essentially, uh, uh, you know, this can be
like differential development of limbs in response to loading,
um, you know, the way you use your teeth,
things like that. I actually have a student now,
we're actually compiling all the The information on this
and should have something coming out soon, but um
it's a relatively strong trend toward showing that there
that there are sex differences in activity patterns going
back, um, you know, many tens of thousands of
years. And so this is just one piece of
evidence among many, along with modern behavioral evidence that
we can kind of triangulate in on what people
were doing in the past. Um, AND I think
we need to include all of these kinds of,
of evidence, and I look forward to kind of,
um, you know, ongoing, ongoing debates in this area.
I think it's, I think it's important and really
interesting.
Yeah, I was going to ask you, uh, that,
of course, by discussing rates of hunting and whether
women participated in hunting in, particularly in more ancient
societies, one of the things that people are debating
here is, uh, how old also are sexual divisions
of labor, right?
Yeah, exactly, right? I mean, um, I think recent
arguments, some people have have argued it would go,
like I said, just 10,000 years ago or so,
um, versus, you know, deep back to, let's say,
Homo erectus, which is one of these, these hominid
species that was kind of starting to look humanlike,
you know, maybe had cooked food, fire, maybe it
was running around, uh, maybe it was like the
first kind of hunter gatherer in some sorts of
ways, um. And you know, it can be it
can be difficult to to reconstruct these sexual divisions
of labor, but but as I said, um, there,
there do tend to be patterns of um Showing
differences, um, going, going back in time. So, um,
I, I'll be curious what what research in this
area, um, reveals,
yeah. Great. So just before we go, where can
people find you when you work on the internet?
Um, Uh, SO I'm, I'm based at the University
of Calgary, so, uh, I run the Vencatrain lab,
um, we study human evolutionary energetics, so you can
just, you know, Google me there, um, or on
Twitter, I think my handle is Vivek_Vassi um VASI,
um, so yeah, or I guess we call it
X these days, um, so yeah, I, I tweet
there, um, occasionally, but that's about it. Yeah.
Great. So I'm adding that to the description of
the interview and Doctor Wenke Terman, thank you so
much again for taking the time to come on
the show. This has been a very fascinating conversation.
So, thanks for having me. I really enjoyed speaking
with you. Take care.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff
McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernardin Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Giancarlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.